[Music]
Welcome to church history and theology,
a study where we glean wisdom from those
who came before us. Come lay aside
today's concerns for a bit and join in a
study of the church throughout the ages.
Our forebears have shaped our faith in
countless ways. Let's go look into one
of those influences today on church
history and
[Music]
theology. Greetings everyone. Welcome to
church history and theology. Today,
series 2, episode 20, the inevitable New
Testament. You know, there's not many
studies that have such a central
importance to the life of a Christian as
to fully understand and even have a
working definition and respect for the
very nature of the New Testament
documents. Inside of them from Matthew
to Revelation is the cotification of not
just authority but clarity, salvation
and most importantly God's promises.
Here we find the object of our faith,
the Lord Jesus Christ, his his life, his
death, his burial and resurrection, his
ascension, his witnesses that have been
sent out in the world from Jerusalem to
Judea to Samaria to the uttermost parts
of the world. And we are recipients of
not just a story, but a story and its
ramifications. This is our hope. This is
our life. This is our
everything. For this, as we work through
the concept of what it means to be in
possession of these documents, it would
help us to understand what are we
actually looking at when we look at the
New Testament. Are we looking at
something that has authority on its own
or do we need something else in order to
understand it? Are the things written in
it hard? Are they easy? Uh yeah, I'll
just let you know there's there's
versions of both actually. There's hard,
there's easy, there's all sorts of
things. Some things require work, other
things are plain. When we look at the
teaching as a whole that is codified in
the New Testament, we realize that we're
recipients of the story and the message
of the gospel of the kingdom of heaven
that how this has broken into the
kingdoms of this world and created and
pulled out from among those kingdoms a
unique people uh known as the church.
All of this to say, when we're looking
at the New Testament, what is it we're
looking
at? Are we just looking at a little bit
more of the Old Testament? Are we
looking at just a holy book? Are we
looking at devotional reflections? Or
perhaps are we looking at something much
bigger and much deeper than all of that
put together?
Today I want to share with you that the
New Testament in short is a
covenantal and providential
necessity. Its very existence is to
continue ongoing inspired apostolic
authority and teaching throughout the
church
age. This is not a new pattern for us.
In fact, within this very pages, we find
that this is how the apostles and the
first Christians interacted with the
scriptures that they had and
demonstrated for us how it is we should
be looking at those things that are
written down and inspired by God. They
are unique writings in the fact that
they are inspired after the advent of
the new covenant and so they should not
be looked at as just a little bit more
of the same. uh they are even more than
uh all of the interpretations that
existed throughout church history. Just
because somebody comes along and says
this is what it says does not in any way
compel the New Testament scriptures to
say what it is somebody else wants it to
say. And so built into how they are
built in and we will see all these
things. We are expressed how to approach
them as servants. We approach the
scriptures as servants. We do not
approach them as judge and jury. These
things are inspired by God. They are as
the apostle Peter calls uh more sure
even than our own
eyes. And so let's kind of go with that
a bit because most of the time when
people talk about the New Testament,
they talk about it more in an abstract
way and uh kind of pretend like, you
know, no Christian knew what these
documents were until some council came
together or whatnot. But um all all of
those um myths and halftruths aside, uh
let's let's kind of delve into how all
of this worked out from the very
beginning. And so since we're talking
about this in church history, we're
going to talk about it kind of in a
historical way, but this class is also
called church history and theology. And
this is absolutely more on the
bibliology side of things in theology
than it is strictly a church history
aspect, but obviously has ramifications
for church history as well. So let's go
back to the beginning, right? You open
up your Bible to Acts chapter 2, what is
typically referred to as the the
birthday of the church. The apostles are
preaching. Now they are not they are not
being given these these uh tongues of
fire on their head in the upper room and
then said okay all right everyone sit
down let's let's write down everything
first uh and then we can go out and just
read what we wrote down. No, as soon as
the spirit came in and filled the
place, they went out preaching and this
the the speaking in tongues was given
specifically so that in that oral
preaching, it can be heard, perceived,
and dealt with inside the hearts of
those
hearers. The I I mean, there's just no
other term for it. the the absolute
miraculous nature of the first oral
teachings by for instance Peter on the
day of Pentecost uh but there was others
who were preaching and prophesying as
well but we have Peter's sermon there
their focus was the work and the and the
glory of God and how they were doing
this was they were giving a two-fold
expression of this one they were using
the scriptures there when Peter is
talking about all of this he is not just
saying here's my experience he is
addressing experience but he also uses
Joel he uses the psalms the the
scriptures are already a part of their
world and so what he expresses to them
is on the basis of what God has already
promised what God has already said what
God has already intended and Peter says
now you're looking at its
fulfillment in the midst of this then he
preaches to them orally Y he doesn't sit
down to write first Peter there at on
the day of Pentecost. Uh he preaches to
them orally
directly. This is what the scriptures
say. This is what God has promised. Thus
says the Lord. And that is the tradition
that continues
on. They say, "Thus says the Lord." Why?
Because here it is written down in what
we now call the Old Testament or the
Hebrew scriptures. He quotes Joel. He
quotes Psalms. This is the pattern that
continues to go forward. The apostles
began with oral pre preaching. They had
authority to go out to cast out
demons, to speak on behalf of God, and
to offer miraculous signs, things that
others tried to imitate and were
punished for doing so. But then at the
at the advent of all of this, we are not
dealing yet with a New Testament. We are
dealing with oral teachings.
In fact, these oral teachings went out
so quickly and everyone knew them so
quickly that before we even close out
Acts chapter 2, we have a description of
the earliest church gatherings where
that these Christians devoted
themselves, this is in uh Acts 2:42,
they devoted themselves to the apostles
teaching, they devoted themselves to the
fellowship, the breaking of bread and
prayers. and awe came upon every soul
and many wonders and signs were being
done through the apostles. And it goes
on to describe uh what what early church
gatherings looked like. We'll we'll no
doubt revisit that uh here in a few
weeks when we talk about worship in the
early
church. This devoting themselves to the
apostles teaching is the way that the
church first interacted with the
eyewitness accounts. Not just the
historical eyewitness accounts, but for
them the authoritative witness accounts
of the gospel, life, ministry, death,
and resurrection of Jesus
Christ. You see, Acts chapter 2, I I'm I
know you probably got this, comes after
Acts chapter 1. And in Acts chapter 1,
what was so important was that Judas had
died after his betrayal of Jesus Christ.
And so, their number becomes 11. And so
the desire was to fulfill out that
number. Well, how are they going to do
that? What is the standard? What is the
the uh requirement for somebody to
fulfill that role? The requirement was
actually quite simple. You needed to be
an
eyewitness. You needed to have been with
us since the very beginning all the way
through. That's how it works.
And so in verse 21 in Acts chapter 1, we
have uh so one of the men who have
accompanied us during all the time the
Lord Jesus went in and out among us,
beginning from the baptism of John until
the day when he was taken up from us,
one of these men must become with us a
witness to his
resurrection. This is how the
apostolic authority continues on.
They ensure that an eyewitness to the
events specifically of the resurrection
but also the entire ministry of Jesus
Christ from the baptism of John all the
way through this is multiple years of of
people seeing these things and so there
there's two of them there one was Joseph
who was called Barcabas and the other
one justice uh excuse me who was also
called justice and
Matias these two guys, one with three
names. Got to love that. These two guys
had been presents from the very
beginning. And yet, one of them is given
a role of apostilhip and the other's
not. And so, he becomes numbered with
the 11 apostles. A lot of people
overlook that passage and forget that
one, the number 12 was important. Not
going to get into why that is. but two
that on top of that an apostle was a
very unique special role. Not every
eyewitness became an apostle and not
every apostle saw everything from John
the Baptist forward. Some apostles we we
know from the gospel witness became
apostles later on. But for the
replacement for Judas's Scariot, they
said, "Look, we've got a couple of
people that have actually been
eyewitnesses from the very very
beginning. We have the authority to make
one of them his replacement. Let's do
it." And so they did so. and Matias uh
was the lot filed to him
etc. The twel apostles come in then the
role of the apostles was primarily to be
what?
Witnesses of the resurrection of Jesus
Christ. Jesus had promised to his
disciples that they would be
witnesses. And this hints to us what the
role of apostles is and then what the
role of scripture going forward should
be expected to be above of of
them. Now, here's the here's the real
kicker. Not everything in the New
Testament is written by an
apostle, but they are all written during
the apostolic age, what we will call the
age of disproof.
In a world where false apostles were
going out in doing lying signs and
wonders, the presence of oral teaching,
the role of all of the the teachings of
the apostles, the oral traditions that
they were handing down to them, these
things were very important. We will
bring that up a little bit towards the
end. But I want you to see kind of the
normal life of Christians before the New
Testament came around. And it's not
something that's usually addressed as
much. Uh if you have your Bibles, you
can turn to Acts chapter 5. In verse 12,
we are focused on this that many signs
and wonders were regularly done among
the people by the hands of the apostles.
They were all together in Solomon's
portico. None of the rest dared join
them, but the people held them in high
esteem. And more than ever, believers
were added to the Lord, multitudes of
both men and women, so that even uh so
that they even carried out the sick into
the streets and laid them on CS and
mats, that as Peter came by, maybe at
least his shadow might fall on some of
them. The people also gathered from the
towns around Jerusalem, bringing the
sick and those afflicted with unclean
spirits, and they were all healed.
Obviously, if you are reading the book
of Acts after Luke, which is how it
always should be read, by the way. If
you are reading it after the close of
the four gospels and you're just reading
canonically all the way through as well,
you'll have the same effect. They are
carrying on and closing out the ministry
of Jesus Christ. At least his physical
incarnate ministry. He came and he was
healing people of all sorts of ailments.
He was raising people from the dead. He
was uh he was healing their paralysis.
He was healing their blindness, their
their their uh those who were deaf. He
was healing those who were lame, those
with withered hands and all manner of
sicknesses and fevers and so forth. The
apostles continue on not only as the
witnesses of Jesus Christ, but as those
who his ministry continued on through
them. As we look to church history, we
actually see this remarkable
handoff that as the New Testament
documents come into the world, the norm
of the miraculous starts to taper
out. We see here before the New
Testament is written at all that it was
normal. As you can see in verse 12, many
signs and wonders were regularly done
among the people by the hands of the
apostles. that that in verse 16 when the
people gathered together all the sick
and afflicted with unclean spirits every
one of them was
healed. That's in case you haven't been
paying attention for 1900 years that is
not the way of it. That is not the norm.
That is if it does happen very atypical.
It is not normal these days. And when I
mean normal, I mean every time uh
somebody's shadow that is a Christian
that has the Holy Spirit passes over
someone, they're healed from sicknesses.
In fact, we even see that by the 60s, we
see in some of Paul's letters, it's not
even the norm then because as the
scriptures are codified, the the New
Testament scriptures are codified, the
necessity for the miraculous as far as
for physical ailments
waines because the miraculous that it
foreshadowed is coming to
life. And in the proclamation of the
gospel, in the dissemination of the New
Testament, what had once been
foreshadowed is now coming to
life. People are being
saved. They are looking into the
scriptures and finding life because
therein life
is. They are actually seeing Christ. In
fact, by the time we come to the close
of the 50s and the opening of the 60s,
we start to see references in the
letters in the New Testament to this
reality and this miraculous shift that
when people are being commissioned to go
out, it is not so much their office as
much as it is what they do with their
office. The warning in Acts chapter 20
against ravenous wolves will arise that
are from the leadership of the church.
What do we do? We correct them by the
scriptures. How is it that the
scriptures play a role in the church and
sanctification? We are sanctified by the
word. We see the pattern then that
works, miraculous works by the apostles
eventually becomes
word. Both are done by the Holy
Spirit. The Holy Spirit was
doing unusual things through the apostle
Paul. It says in
Ephesus, the word of God, the New
Testament writings are unusual writings
that are inspired by the spirit of God.
Not not everything that an apostle wrote
was
scripture. Peter, if if our account is
correct, did not write any scripture
before the year
60. But he was an apostle for 30 years.
He wrote grocery lists. I'm sure he
wrote personal letters. I'm sure he
wrote all manner of things, but none of
them were scripture. He even taught
orally all manner of things. We even
have an instance in the book of
Galatians where he went and in his
practice did things wrong and had to be
corrected by another apostle. It means
that the apostolic presence wasn't
perfect. Not everything an apostle said
was perfect. They were fallible humans
still.
But when God used them to write
scripture, what was perfect was
maintained. What was scripture was
preserved because that's what God
promises to do with such
things. Presence and then
permanence. Apostles were once present
and then only their teachings remained
permanent. And in order to permanently
do so, it had to be in written
form. And I want to talk about that just
a little bit because many people get
their categories mixed up on
this. But when a new covenant is
formed, a written
documentation is
required. The gospel required not only
witnesses as we've seen in the not only
in the apostles but the Holy Spirit
himself as well as all the Christians
but most specifically the apostles and
the Holy Spirit are defined as witnesses
to that
end. There has to be written
documentation by the witnesses. More
than that that written documentation has
to be in cottifying this covenant. And
so those witnesses being given directly
by Christ for this purpose that the Holy
Spirit would guide them into that truth
and to call to their minds, recall to
their minds everything that Jesus had
spoken to them. The scriptures
themselves, the gospel documents, the
book of Acts and all of the letters are
all scripture. How do we know? Well, we
know be in the passage of time. What has
God preserved throughout history?
This is why there is zero debate amongst
all Christians about the contents of the
New Testament after the passage of time
has shown us plainly what things
are. We have debates sometimes over the
apocryphal uh books, but as far as for
the New Testament documents, there is
none. That has been understood for many,
many, many, many
centuries. There's no distinction in the
New Testaments between even Catholics
and Orthodox for all of our other
disagreements or the oral Orthodox or
the Protestants or anything. All of us
hold to the same 27 books of the New
Testament. There's a reason for that.
They're deathly
clear. It is obvious what God has
preserved. It is obvious what plays a
role in the dissemination of the
covenant in announcing it, in clarifying
it, in expressing
it. Every covenant requires a written
documentation.
Sinai in Exodus 31:18 required the
tablets of the testimony of a
witness. They required the two tablets
of stone on which were the center part
of the law written by the very finger of
God. It says the ten commandments that
is expanded later as God dictates the
law, the rest of the law to Moses who
writes it on the scrolls. And then at a
later point, Moses sits down and writes
the entire Torah and and builds it all
out of there, delivering to the people
of God the very covenantal
framework. This is your God and thus
says the
Lord. The New Testament takes on this
exact same form. At one point, what was
commanded by the Lord is given by works
of miraculous origin. We see this with
Moses in the plagues of Egypt. There is
a great deliverance that takes place, a
lamb that is slain, blood that covers,
protects and saves the people, guides
the people, and then they come all the
way to the throne of
God. And then throughout these
miraculous works where they're fed in
the desert, where they're the Red Sea is
parted for them, these these miraculous
and unusual things that are being
done. Then we see the written
form. Then we see that not only is there
a promise that is being fulfilled, but
in reflex we see what exactly was going
on. Because the Christians that were
following the apostles in say Acts
chapter 5 were not aware of say the
sermon on the
mount. Not all of them. When the Greeks
were being saved in uh in later po
points as it goes out beyond Samaria and
and continues places like Antioch and
Ephesus and so forth, they had no
firsthand account of of exactly what
happened with with regards to the Olivet
discourse.
Not until the book of Matthew was
written down did they have this clearly
and definitively given to all of them
and they were able to read these things
as they gathered together. Were there
collections of sayings and things like
this? Sure, because there were other
eyewitnesses, but it required an apostle
or those who were approved by the
apostles to sit down and codify these
things as the Holy Spirit gave them
utterance. Just like it was on the very
first day of the church, the word that
comes out that is able to be translated
to the hearts of people was given by the
Holy Spirit of God. And the Holy Spirit
will ensure that the scriptures are
given at the right time to the right
people in the right place and are
preserved throughout history so that his
people will be able to read and see,
apply, love
and cherish them.
Covenants require lasting
documentation. It is not enough that
just these things happened in history
and then we look at the gospel writings
and say, "Ah, these are historical
writings." They're not just historical
writings. They're so much more than
that. They are the completion of the
covenant. I want you to think about
something with me.
Because there is an aspect to this that
we don't usually have to wrestle with
and that is that at one point there was
a life of Christians entire generation
of Christians that did not have the New
Testament but instead they had the
apostolic presence and oral
proclamation. They were sufficient at
first and as we just saw in Acts chapter
2 they devoted themselves to the
apostles preaching. But I want you I
want you to understand that the apostles
preaching as we even have it preserved
for us in the book of acts includes the
scriptures all the
time. Right? It wasn't that the apostles
were just eyewitnesses and we're
starting from ground zero. 80% of the
scriptures of the Old Testament. It's
already complete and finished. It's
given witness to by Christ. They are
quoting it. They are dealing with it
every singlewhere they
go. In the apostolic age, it wasn't just
eyewitnesses. They were giving the
scriptures to the people of God. And so
their oral proclamation had to be held
to the higher authority and that is
scripture. This is why the Bereans for
instance are held up as as more
noble-minded. Why? Because they checked
the apostolic oral teachings against the
scriptures. If it's from the Lord, it
must be consistent with what else is
from the Lord. There must be
consistency. It must be perceivable. The
the apostles are not coming up to the
Brians and going, "Ah, you don't have
any authority to interpret that." Well,
what are you talking about? The
scriptures themselves are clear and
prospicuous. They are able to be
perceived by the people of
God. and even the teachings of the
apostles are able to be
weighed. So too are the teachings and
the words and the interpretations of any
bishop or pastor in the age to
come. This is going to be very necessary
because false teachers are promised to
arise among the leaders of the church
and among the
church. How are we to deal with it?
We're going to weigh what they say by
scripture. We have
to. Else we just become those that say,
"Well, those who have the most influence
are the ones that are right." We don't
want this. God does not want this. What
we want is for God to say things and for
us to listen. Thus says the Lord. Now,
if somebody says, "Thus says the Lord,
because I have decided and the Lord is
not thus said," what we're dealing with
is a false teacher.
not some someone with the authority to
speak on behalf of God when God is not
using them to
speak. And so we have these references
in the New Testament. You have even the
the encouragement from the Apostle Paul
to the churches in Galatia, actually one
of the earliest New Testament documents.
Uh there's pretty much only the book of
James written before this. And that is
Galatians chapter 1. And so we're
talking about the earliest writings that
Paul has actually
written. And he says to the churches in
Galatia, he says, "I am astonished that
you are so quickly deserting him who
called you in the grace of Christ and
are turning to a different
gospel." Now, that's an odd thing to say
when most likely none of the four
gospels are written
yet. You are turning to a different
gospel. Not that there is another one,
but there are some who trouble you and
want to distort the gospel of Christ.
Now, a little bit of background here.
The Judaizers were being were going out
into Galatia claiming to be sent out by
James, the Lord's brother in this in the
city of Jerusalem, one of the leaders in
the city of
Jerusalem. And they were claiming to
come with the authority to say these
things. They were they were requiring
them to be circumcised. You had to
become part of the Jewish nation. You
had to convert to be Jews in order to be
saved Gentiles. Right? And so Paul here
is saying,"Look, even if we," meaning
the
apostles, or an angel from heaven should
preach to you a gospel that is contrary
to the one that we preached to you, let
him be accursed. As we have said before,
again, oral teachings here. So now I say
again, written form, if anyone is
preaching to you a gospel contrary to
the one you received, let him be
accursed. In other words, what good
things are said by the
apostles? What necessary things for the
life of the church are said by the
apostles are all of them written down.
Now, that's what he's doing. He's
saying, "What we once said, now I write
here for you. If anyone is preaching to
you a gospel contrary to the one you
receive, let him be accursed." In other
words, even if another apostle came or
an angel from heaven came, if anyone
comes and preached you another gospel
other than the one we are defining right
now and have been defining all along,
throw them
away. That's how you're able to
determine false teachers and false
apostles. By the way, you know how hard
that would be in the age of the
apostles? There was lying signs and
wonders going on, too. You still could
not just appeal to only miracles. There
had to be consistency with the
scriptural witness that already was.
They had to be consistent with the Old
Testament. They had to be consistent
with the apostolic message, the
teachings of Jesus. They had to be
consistent all along. And if they
weren't, let them be
accursed. Why?
because the gospel, the faith has been
given to the
saints. Think about the way Jude talks
about this,
right? In in the very opening of his
letter, he writes down and says,
"Beloved, although I was very eager to
write to you about our common salvation,
I found it necessary to write appealing
to you to contend for the faith that was
once for all delivered to the saints.
Because certain people have crept in
unnoticed who long ago were destined and
designated for this condemnation.
Ungodly people who pervert the grace of
our God into sensuality and deny our
only master and Lord Jesus
Christ. Why does Jude want to eagerly
write to him? He says, "Look, I wanted
to write to you about salvation, but
there's there's this pressing need to
appeal to you to contend for the faith
that was once and for all delivered to
the saints." In other words, this is
retroactively looking at history and
saying, "The faith of of uh of the
Christians, the faith of Christ was
given to the apostles already and in the
past, and now I want to write to you to
just contend for that." In other words,
even by the writing of the time of Jude,
we are not waiting for more
gospel. We're not waiting for more
revelation. What the apostles have been
teaching is being codified. And here
Jude, one of the brothers of Jesus here,
writes this down too. And he says, "I
wanted to write to you about common
salvation, but instead I found it
necessary to write to you to contend for
the faith that was once and for all
delivered to the saints." He writes in
the past tense. This has already
happened. This is obviously as we're
reading the New Testament. This is while
the New Testament is being written. This
is past tense. It's already been given
for us. Contend for that
faith. Battle for it. It's worth
everything. Why? Because false teachers
are going to be in the churches all
throughout the church age. And how is it
we do battle? We do battle with a sword
of the word. That's it.
How is it we do evangelism? We send
preachers who are able to preach the
word of God. Why? Because faith comes by
hearing and hearing by the word of
Christ. Why was there such a delay in
the apostles writing this?
Do you ever notice how almost all of the
New Testament documents are written in
the closing decades of an apostles's
life? This is not by
accident. The apostolic age was
unique and so was the authority of the
apostles. And so what they wrote became
unique. What they wrote was by the
inspiration of the Holy Spirit. It is
not because the Holy Spirit needed them
to mature. No, the Holy Spirit can use
people like Jonah as well as as anyone
else. It wasn't some
practicality. It was part of the
picture. The apostles had an authority
during their lifetime that was distin
distinct from every other authority that
will follow
them. It didn't mean they were perfect.
But God ensured that what they wrote
was whenever it was
scripture. The writing itself was part
of the providential design. It was
spirit-ledd. Jesus had already spoken to
them about it. When I leave, I will send
the Holy Spirit and he will teach you
all things. He will bring to your
remembrance everything that I have said
to
you. That's a tremendous promise. It is
the the ground that is the New
Testament. Many are those who hold
instead to say that apostolic succession
or some such is defined by the office or
the laying on of hands and therefore
authority is passed down this way. I
completely disagree.
Apostolic succession is not officebased.
If it was, there really is no real
purpose to the New Testament because
they are not
unique. If the authority of the Holy
Spirit continues in the same way as the
age of the apostles, then I would say
that the rest of the church age still
lives in the apostolic era. And there's
not actually necessity for the New
Testament. By the way, this is one of
the reasons why you find people that
hold to such things always downplay the
clarity and sufficiency of the New
Testament. Because in order to have
modern apostolic succession or modern
apostolic authority, you have to
downplay the New Testament or you have
to make it so that nobody can understand
what its words are even though it speaks
very clearly.
Peter comments on this in second Peter
chapter
1. He says that he intended always to
remind this these churches he's writing
to of these qualities. Uh by the way,
remarkable passage, one of my favorite
in all of scripture. Uh is is the
opening of second Peter 1. Um anyway,
but that's just a side note when he says
in verse 12, therefore I intend always
to remind you of these qualities,
remarkable list of qualities before
that. Though you know them and are
established in the truth that you have,
I think it right, Peter says, as long as
I am in this body to stir you up by way
of reminder, since I know that the
putting off of my body will be soon as
our Lord Jesus Christ made clear to me,
and I will make every effort so that
after my departure you may be able at
any time to recall these things.
That's second Peter 1:es
12-15. Look at the way he's thinking
about
this. Now, this is Peter who has been an
apostle after the ascension of Jesus
Christ now for over 30 years here
towards the end of his life. Actually,
if if our if our dates are correct here,
he is going to be put to death by Nero
within a handful of years, maybe within
three years here, really right towards
the end. And he says, 'Look, this is
happening soon. And so what am I doing?
Why am I writing this down? Here is one
of the apostles. He says, he's writing
this down because he knows that he's
about to
die. And he says, I want you after my
death to be able at any time to recall
these things. That's what the New
Testament is all about.
He doesn't say, "Oh, if you want to be
able to recall all these special things
and whatnot, here's a bishop over here
that I uh that I laid hands on. Here's
another one who's my successor in this
town. Uh, by the way, go to Rome." Uh,
even though he wasn't a bishop there,
you know, go to Rome and, you know,
check with Lionus or or or or check with
uh, you know, check with Clement or you
can check with all the No, he says, "I'm
writing this. You have it in writing now
so that you'll be able to recall these
things.
When John writes the book of Revelation,
the warning at the end is not about
going to some thing and making sure that
you listen to this guy or that guy. No,
he says all the words of the prophecy of
this book are great. Don't change
them. Don't add to them. Don't take away
from
them. Leave it be. The word of God is
perfect. And when God inspires something
through either his pro prophets or
apostles, those things are from the
Lord. And so when we read for instance 1
Corinthians or when we read the book of
Acts or when we read Matthew, we can say
thus says the Lord and then read the New
Testament. The same way as it is with
anything in the Old Testament where the
apostles were preaching and they were
using Joel or Amos at the council of
Jerusalem as their base of reasoning.
All of this is to be saying thus says
the Lord because that's the one from
whom we take our marching orders. Beware
anyone who stands between Christians and
their
God. Beware anyone who stands between
God's word and God's people and says,
"No, no, you don't have the ability for
this. Let me tell you what it
says." God is able to speak to his
people. Our job to publicly read
scripture is evidence of that very
thing.
True apostolic succession is holding
fast to the apostolic doctrine, holding
fast to the apostolic testimony and
preaching what they
preached, devoting ourselves as it was
on the very first day of the church to
the apostles
teaching. The apostles showed us how to
submit to scripture.
Peter at Pentecost quotes from Joel 2
and from Psalm 16. At the Jerusalem
Council, James, the Lord's brother,
quotes from Amos 9 and uses it as the
backbone of his
argument. Paul even praises the Bereans
for testing his apostolic message with
scripture. That's in Acts 17, by the
way.
Apostolic authority, the oral authority
was always under scriptural authority.
And let me say this even further. If and
when they spoke something or taught
something that was not consistent with
the scriptures, they were
wrong. This is why we have it emphasized
for us. Paul's dealing with Peter when
he was wrong. He was teaching with his
actions something that was unbiblical.
something that was not in keeping with
the gospel. And Paul had to rebuke
him. Why? Because not everything an
apostle did was right. They were not
sinless. Not everything they wrote was
scripture. They were not sinless just
because they were picking up a pen.
Scripture was unique in the apostles
lives. And the apostles were unique in
the church's life. And the works until
the day that they became words were
unique. They were miraculous. They were
exceptional. They were
different. And as the apostles started
nearing the end of their lives, they
codified their teachings into the New
Testament
documents. Scripture is always the test
of apostolic authenticity. That is how
the the the elders in Ephesus in Acts
chapter 20 were told to weigh and to
deal with the wolves that would rise
from their own
number. You have you have references in
2 Corinthians 11 of su uh pseudo
aaposttoes false
apostles. Just because they claimed to
be apostles and they said something
didn't mean it. You had to actually
analyze their life and their fruit and
what they're
doing. The test of truth was never the
office. It was always what they were
teaching. Whether you're an angel of
heaven or claiming to be an apostle, if
you are teaching something other than
the gospel that was preached, you are to
be
dismissed. The church was
responsible to practice its testing of
the spirits by testing even the
apostolic claimments by the word of God.
Same principle applies
today. And let me define what I mean
when I say the word of God because the
Catholic Church for instance in its
catechism uh blends these things
together. The word of God is the
scriptures written by the prophets and
the apostles finished by the end of the
first
century. The word of God is not some
conglomerate of sacred tradition and
sacred scripture. That's nonsense. Nor
is sacred scripture a subpoint of sacred
tradition as the Eastern Orthodox put
it. No, the scriptures sit above the
church.
Period. The church was responsible to
test even the apostolic claimments by
the word of God. The same principle
applies today. Leaders are judged by the
word of God.
You see even the attitude towards the
scriptures what what Timothy as as
almost like an an apostolic delegate uh
to go and establish leaders in churches
uh he's expressed to go out when he
preaches what is he supposed to be
preaching preach my oral traditions
alone no second Timothy is written
towards the very end of Paul's life
preach the
word be ready in season and out of
season reprove rebuke exhort w with with
all authority. Why? Because it's in the
word. When when Paul writes to Titus,
yet another one of these these almost
apostolic delegates who are given the
responsibility of establishing elders
amongst every local church, what does he
say in uh what what is it? Titus 1:9.
Yeah. Uh, a a bishop must hold firm to
the trustworthy word as taught so that
he may be able to give instruction and
sound doctrine and also to rebuke those
who contradict
it.
Whatever is contradictory to the word of
God, the scriptures must be rebuked.
That authority is not because Titus has
the authority. It's because the word has
that authority and that person is
contradicting
it. And so when the scriptures say
something and then another person comes
on and says something that is
contradictory, not just different or a
different spin, but
contradictory, the clarity of the word
of God is
assumed. They are held to the standard
of the word of God. And if they're
contradicting the word of God, they are
to be rebuked regardless of what they
claim as far as office or position. I
don't care if someone laid hands on you.
I don't care if you are ordained to this
office or that. I don't care if you have
degrees out to wazoo. If you are
contradicting the scriptures, you are
wrong. It doesn't matter if you're a
pope or a king. It doesn't matter if
you're a surf or a lord.
The scriptures are over everything in
the
church. Jesus did the exact same thing.
This is the thing. The apostles didn't
come up with this approach to scripture.
Jesus's view of scripture is higher than
anybody's view of scripture. You ever
looked into this? You you should just
Jesus's view of the scriptures is as
high I can't even really codify how high
it is. This was one of the first things
I wanted to go and write my dissertation
on back in the beginning. And I started
looking into it and I realized that a
lot of people had written on this
already. I was like, "Oh man, what an
amazing topic." But Jesus's view of the
scriptures is as high as it
gets. Scriptures cannot be broken.
Scriptures endure. Scriptures are
capable of bringing you to salvation
just just by their very existence.
It is God speaking to you through the
writings that he gave to David a
thousand years ago. Like the way that he
talks about scripture is higher than
anything else. It really is
remarkable. And so when he commisss his
apostles to go out into all the world
and teach them whatever he was saying,
look, Jesus didn't write down anything
that became
scripture for the
church. you know whether he wrote a uh
you know grocery store list or something
else we have no we have no recollection
of but he expressed to the apostles that
they would go out and not only that the
Holy Spirit was going to give them
recollection to everything that he
taught but he said to them that their
very responsibility was to go out and
teach everyone everything that I've
commanded
you and don't forget also when he sees
John in Revelation 1, he tells him to
write this
down. It was always a part of the plan
that there would be scriptures. The book
of Revelation is commanded by the mouth
of Jesus Christ
himself. The New Testament is Christ's
will and Christ's acts and Christ's
authority preserved through the spirit.
It should not surprise us that then it
comes with miracles. It comes with
extraordinary works as far as the norm
in the life of the church in the
apostolic
age because it was the norm during
Christ's
ministry. But all of these were
foreshadowings of the gospel era when
the church would continue to grow
throughout the world. But there in the
earliest days as eyewitnesses, they came
alongside the witness of the Holy Spirit
in a very special
way. There are those in the world that
claim that the church came first and it
gave us the scriptures. I had somebody
lobb this at me as if it was a
meaningful rebuke and to say, "Ah, you
you criticize a church that gave you the
scriptures." Honestly, I can't think of
something I've read recently that's more
offensive. And people try to offend me
constantly. The idea that a 4th century
church gave me, a Christian, a child of
God, the scriptures, and that the
scriptures weren't actually given to us
all by God himself is offensive and
destructive to every form of theory,
theology, or logic.
The church existed before the written
New Testament, but not before the
word. The word of God existed before
that. The church was born from the
preaching of the Old
Testament. Not only that, the church was
born in the midst of the apostolic
message while they were alive. And
before they died, the entirety of the
New Testament was written, codified, and
done. You have to you have to recognize
how unique that is even for scripture.
like that hasn't happened since the
Torah where you have at the very start
the commandments of God written on two
tablets of stone and then that's
expanded out as God dictates the law the
entire law all the 600 plus commandments
of the law to Moses and then the whole
story of that is expanded to include
Genesis through Deuteronomy by the time
that Moses
dies. All of that to say most of the
rest of the Old Testament took over a
thousand
years in the New Testament, one
generation. It is unique what God was
doing. And people say, "Well, what about
tradition?" Right? What about tradition?
Right? Don't don't we have that
reference? Man, I can't tell you on
Twitter how many times I see this uh
posted up. 2 Thessalonians 2:15. So then
brothers says Paul says stand firm and
hold to the traditions that you were
taught by us either by our spoken word
or by our letter. Yes, marvelous
reference and people say ah see
therefore there is sacred oral tradition
throughout the history of the church and
then this unique written tradition at
the very beginning but it's you know um
it's it's yeah I guess it's just there
too. Let me let let let us look at this
in context because what's happening in 2
Thessalonians, what's going on? 2
Thessalonians is written in either the
year 50 or 51. It is one of the earliest
documents of the New Testament. It is
written, let's see, I think there's only
James and Galatians and First
Thessalonians written before
this. And so, we are still well early in
the apostolic era. And so, what's
floating around at this time? the the
oral teachings of the
apostles. I think the only apostle who's
dead at this point is
James. The rest of them are still alive,
still preaching, still teaching, still
guiding churches, and hardly any of them
have written anything
yet. And so, here's the application of
that. So yes, if you are a
Christian living in Thessalonica in the
year
51ish, and the only parts of the New
Testament written so far are the two
letters to your church, the book of
James and the book of Galatians, and
literally nothing else yet, and you
personally have heard Paul preaching the
gospel, then you are in possession of
authoritative apostolic tradition before
the New Testament is written. Hold to
it.
whether it's by spoken word or by
letter. But if you think that that
directly applies to you today, let me
give you a bit of dose of
reality. You aren't in possession of
that oral tradition. Whoever you are,
the needed oral traditions that were all
later codified in the New Testament
documents contain everything that was
preserved. Every syllable of oral
teaching that was pres that was
necessary to the life of the church was
preserved in the New Testament. Not a
single syllable of the apostles oral
teachings exists outside the New
Testament, nor of
Jesus. Period.
Nothing. There's not some secret
handshake or special coded words that
are handed down when a bishop ordains
another bishop or some special wisdom
that comes to you because someone laid
hands on you when you were ordained. It
doesn't work like this. There is no
magical mystical oral tradition that
comes all the way back from the
apostles. It is a myth.
It is a way for false teachings to creep
into the church. And oh my goodness, how
many have done so and have led people
away from the clarity of the word of God
and its
authority. No, that's not even how the
apostles dealt with the scriptures that
existed in their day. They did not say,
"Ah, there is this there is this Old
Testament scriptures. Yes, but there's
also these
traditions." That's not what the
apostles did. That's what the Pharisees
did.
The apostles received and recognized
scripture. They did not invent it. This
is why everywhere in the New Testament
documents, there is encouragements
preach the word of God. This is what the
word of God says. Thus says the Lord all
of these
things. the apostles during their
preaching of the gospel of Jesus Christ
and especially when they wrote it down,
we can see even ju just as as Paul is
speaking to the same church in in the
Thessal in Thessalonica in 1
Thessalonians chapter 2, he says this.
He says, "We also thank God constantly
for this, that when you, church in
Thessalonica, received the word of God,
which you heard from us, you accepted it
not as the word of men, but as it really
is, the word of God, which is at work in
you believers."
Again here you have the fact that the
word of God both the Old Testament and
the message of the cross during the age
of the apostles still for the message of
the cross existed. Now this is the late
40s early 50s still existed in oral
form but it was the word of God coming
down directly to their ears. And so yes,
we understand that 2 Thessalonians 2,
whether you were heard the uh from us
orally the traditions of the gospel or
whether in written form, hold to them.
And so let me ask you this. Have you
heard from an
apostle the gospel
itself? I hope the answer is yes,
because you certainly have if you've
read the New Testament. Hold to it.
The only thing that you've received is
the letters, the written words. There is
no
oral tradition out there. It does not
exist. There's a way that people use to
create tyranny and error in the church
and man-made authorities. We hold fast
to the word of God. We hold fast to the
scriptures as written. We don't need
apostolic lineage. There isn't any
apostolic lineage that's meaningful
anyway.
You need the apostolic
word and all of it that was meant for
the church was written and preserved in
the New Testament documents. Why?
Because at the very core of this is the
new promise given to us in Christ. That
his blood, this blood of the new
covenant is itself to be proclaimed to
the end of the world. All of the
ramifications of that promise, all of
the outlines of that covenant, the whole
story of how it can contain that is the
New Testament and these documents of
ratification are given to the
church and it is their authority.
Scripture Genesis through revelation is
where authority lives. That's where
Christ
speaks. And they are indeed able to make
you wise unto salvation.
Now go read your
Bibles. Lord's blessings.
[Music]
[Applause]